Title: Valleytronics in 2D materials
Publication Date: 2016/8/23
Authors: John R Schaibley, Hongyi Yu, Genevieve Clark, Pasqual Rivera, Jason S Ross, Kyle L Seyler, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Semiconductor technology is currently based on the manipulation of electronic charge; however, electrons have additional degrees of freedom, such as spin and valley, that can be used to encode and process information. Over the past several decades, there has been significant progress in manipulating electron spin for semiconductor spintronic devices, motivated by potential spin-based information processing and storage applications. However, experimental progress towards manipulating the valley degree of freedom for potential valleytronic devices has been limited until very recently. We review the latest advances in valleytronics, which have largely been enabled by the isolation of 2D materials (such as graphene and semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides) that host an easily accessible electronic valley degree of freedom, allowing for dynamic control.
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/natrevmats201655

Title: Electrically tunable excitonic light-emitting diodes based on monolayer WSe2 pn junctions
Publication Date: 2014/4/1
Authors: Jason S Ross, Philip Klement, Aaron M Jones, Nirmal J Ghimire, Jiaqiang Yan, DG Mandrus, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Kenji Kitamura, Wang Yao, David H Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: The development of light-emitting diodes with improved efficiency, spectral properties, compactness and integrability is important for lighting, display, optical interconnect, logic and sensor applications,,,,,,,. Monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides have recently emerged as interesting candidates for optoelectronic applications due to their unique optical properties,,,,,,,. Electroluminescence has already been observed from monolayer MoS2 devices,. However, the electroluminescence efficiency was low and the linewidth broad due both to the poor optical quality of the MoS2 and to ineffective contacts. Here, we report electroluminescence from lateral p–n junctions in monolayer WSe2 induced electrostatically using a thin boron nitride support as a dielectric layer with multiple metal gates beneath. This structure allows effective injection of electrons and holes, and, combined with the high optical quality of WSe2 …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nnano.2014.26

Title: Electrical control of neutral and charged excitons in a monolayer semiconductor
Publication Date: 2013/2/12
Authors: Jason S Ross, Sanfeng Wu, Hongyi Yu, Nirmal J Ghimire, Aaron M Jones, Grant Aivazian, Jiaqiang Yan, David G Mandrus, Di Xiao, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Monolayer group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides have recently emerged as semiconducting alternatives to graphene in which the true two-dimensionality is expected to illuminate new semiconducting physics. Here we investigate excitons and trions (their singly charged counterparts), which have thus far been challenging to generate and control in the ultimate two-dimensional limit. Utilizing high-quality monolayer molybdenum diselenide, we report the unambiguous observation and electrostatic tunability of charging effects in positively charged (X+), neutral (Xo) and negatively charged (X−) excitons in field-effect transistors via photoluminescence. The trion charging energy is large (30 meV), enhanced by strong confinement and heavy effective masses, whereas the linewidth is narrow (5 meV) at temperatures <55 K. This is greater spectral contrast than in any known quasi-two-dimensional system. We also …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms2498

Title: Observation of long-lived interlayer excitons in monolayer MoSe 2–WSe 2 heterostructures
Publication Date: 2015/2/24
Authors: Pasqual Rivera, John R Schaibley, Aaron M Jones, Jason S Ross, Sanfeng Wu, Grant Aivazian, Philip Klement, Kyle Seyler, Genevieve Clark, Nirmal J Ghimire, Jiaqiang Yan, DG Mandrus, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Van der Waals bound heterostructures constructed with two-dimensional materials, such as graphene, boron nitride and transition metal dichalcogenides, have sparked wide interest in device physics and technologies at the two-dimensional limit. One highly coveted heterostructure is that of differing monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides with type-II band alignment, with bound electrons and holes localized in individual monolayers, that is, interlayer excitons. Here, we report the observation of interlayer excitons in monolayer MoSe2–WSe2 heterostructures by photoluminescence and photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy. We find that their energy and luminescence intensity are highly tunable by an applied vertical gate voltage. Moreover, we measure an interlayer exciton lifetime of ~1.8 ns, an order of magnitude longer than intralayer excitons in monolayers. Our work demonstrates optical pumping of …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms7242

Title: Optical generation of excitonic valley coherence in monolayer WSe2
Publication Date: 2013/9/1
Authors: Aaron M Jones, Hongyi Yu, Nirmal J Ghimire, Sanfeng Wu, Grant Aivazian, Jason S Ross, Bo Zhao, Jiaqiang Yan, David G Mandrus, Di Xiao, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: As a consequence of degeneracies arising from crystal symmetries, it is possible for electron states at band-edges (‘valleys’) to have additional spin-like quantum numbers,,,,,. An important question is whether coherent manipulation can be performed on such valley pseudospins, analogous to that implemented using true spin, in the quest for quantum technologies,. Here, we show that valley coherence can be generated and detected. Because excitons in a single valley emit circularly polarized photons, linear polarization can only be generated through recombination of an exciton in a coherent superposition of the two valley states. Using monolayer semiconductor WSe2 devices, we first establish the circularly polarized optical selection rules for addressing individual valley excitons and trions. We then demonstrate coherence between valley excitons through the observation of linearly polarized luminescence …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nnano.2013.151

Title: Lateral heterojunctions within monolayer MoSe2–WSe2 semiconductors
Publication Date: 2014/12/1
Authors: Chunming Huang, Sanfeng Wu, Ana M Sanchez, Jonathan JP Peters, Richard Beanland, Jason S Ross, Pasqual Rivera, Wang Yao, David H Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Heterojunctions between three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors with different bandgaps are the basis of modern light-emitting diodes, diode lasers and high-speed transistors. Creating analogous heterojunctions between different 2D semiconductors would enable band engineering within the 2D plane,, and open up new realms in materials science, device physics and engineering. Here we demonstrate that seamless high-quality in-plane heterojunctions can be grown between the 2D monolayer semiconductors MoSe2 and WSe2. The junctions, grown by lateral heteroepitaxy using physical vapour transport, are visible in an optical microscope and show enhanced photoluminescence. Atomically resolved transmission electron microscopy reveals that their structure is an undistorted honeycomb lattice in which substitution of one transition metal by another occurs across the interface. The growth of such lateral …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat4064

Title: Electrical tuning of valley magnetic moment through symmetry control in bilayer MoS2
Publication Date: 2013/3/1
Authors: Sanfeng Wu, Jason S Ross, Gui-Bin Liu, Grant Aivazian, Aaron Jones, Zaiyao Fei, Wenguang Zhu, Di Xiao, Wang Yao, David Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Crystal symmetry governs the nature of electronic Bloch states. For example, in the presence of time-reversal symmetry, the orbital magnetic moment and Berry curvature of the Bloch states must vanish unless inversion symmetry is broken. In certain two-dimensional electron systems such as bilayer graphene, the intrinsic inversion symmetry can be broken simply by applying a perpendicular electric field,. In principle, this offers the possibility of switching on/off and continuously tuning the magnetic moment and Berry curvature near the Dirac valleys by reversible electrical control,. Here we investigate this possibility using polarization-resolved photoluminescence of bilayer MoS2, which has the same symmetry as bilayer graphene but has a bandgap in the visible spectrum, allowing direct optical probing,,,,,. We find that in bilayer MoS2 the circularly polarized photoluminescence can be continuously tuned from −15 …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys2524

Title: Vapor–solid growth of high optical quality MoS2 monolayers with near-unity valley polarization
Publication Date: 2013/3/1
Authors: Sanfeng Wu, Chunming Huang, Grant Aivazian, Jason S Ross, David H Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are atomically thin direct-gap semiconductors with potential applications in nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, and electrochemical sensing. Recent theoretical and experimental efforts suggest that they are ideal systems for exploiting the valley degrees of freedom of Bloch electrons. For example, Dirac valley polarization has been demonstrated in mechanically exfoliated monolayer MoS2 samples by polarization-resolved photoluminescence, although polarization has rarely been seen at room temperature. Here we report a new method for synthesizing high optical quality monolayer MoS2 single crystals up to 25 μm in size on a variety of standard insulating substrates (SiO2, sapphire, and glass) using a catalyst-free vapor–solid growth mechanism. The technique is simple and reliable, and the optical quality of the crystals is extremely high, as demonstrated …
URL Link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/nn4002038

Title: Ultrafast hot-carrier-dominated photocurrent in graphene
Publication Date: 2012/2/1
Authors: Dong Sun, Grant Aivazian, Aaron M Jones, Jason S Ross, Wang Yao, David Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: The combination of its high electron mobility 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, broadband absorption 6 and ultrafast luminescence 7, 8, 9, 10 make graphene attractive for optoelectronic and photonic applications 11, 12, 13, including transparent electrodes 14, mode-locked lasers 15 and high-speed optical modulators 16. Photo-excited carriers that have not cooled to the temperature of the graphene lattice are known as hot carriers, and may limit device speed and energy efficiency. However, their roles in charge and energy transport are not fully understood 17, 18, 19, 20. Here, we use time-resolved scanning photocurrent microscopy to demonstrate that hot carriers, rather than phonons, dominate energy transport across a tunable graphene p–n junction excited by ultrafast laser pulses. The photocurrent response time varies from 1.5 ps at room temperature to 4 ps at 20 K, implying a fundamental bandwidth of∼ 500 GHz (refs 12, 13, 21 …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nnano.2011.243.pdf

Title: Spin-layer locking effects in optical orientation of exciton spin in bilayer WSe2
Publication Date: 2014/2/1
Authors: Aaron M Jones, Hongyi Yu, Jason S Ross, Philip Klement, Nirmal J Ghimire, Jiaqiang Yan, David G Mandrus, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Coupling degrees of freedom of distinct nature plays a critical role in numerous physical phenomena,,,,,,,,,. The recent emergence of layered materials,, provides a laboratory for studying the interplay between internal quantum degrees of freedom of electrons,. Here we report new coupling phenomena connecting real spin with layer pseudospins in bilayer WSe2. In polarization-resolved photoluminescence measurements, we observe large spin orientation of neutral and charged excitons by both circularly and linearly polarized excitation, with the trion spectrum splitting into a doublet at large vertical electrical field. These observations can be explained as a locking of spin and layer pseudospin in a given valley, where the doublet implies an electrically induced spin splitting. The observed distinctive behaviour of the trion doublet under polarized excitation further provides spectroscopic evidence of interlayer and …
URL Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys2848

Title: Interlayer exciton optoelectronics in a 2D heterostructure p–n junction
Publication Date: 2017/2/8
Authors: Jason S Ross, Pasqual Rivera, John Schaibley, Eric Lee-Wong, Hongyi Yu, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Jiaqiang Yan, David Mandrus, David Cobden, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Semiconductor heterostructures are backbones for solid-state-based optoelectronic devices. Recent advances in assembly techniques for van der Waals heterostructures have enabled the band engineering of semiconductor heterojunctions for atomically thin optoelectronic devices. In two-dimensional heterostructures with type II band alignment, interlayer excitons, where Coulomb bound electrons and holes are confined to opposite layers, have shown promising properties for novel excitonic devices, including a large binding energy, micron-scale in-plane drift-diffusion, and a long population and valley polarization lifetime. Here, we demonstrate interlayer exciton optoelectronics based on electrostatically defined lateral p–n junctions in a MoSe2–WSe2 heterobilayer. Applying a forward bias enables the first observation of electroluminescence from interlayer excitons. At zero bias, the p–n junction functions as a …
URL Link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03398

Title: Control of two-dimensional excitonic light emission via photonic crystal
Publication Date: 2014/6/1
Authors: Sanfeng Wu, Sonia Buckley, Aaron M Jones, Jason S Ross, Nirmal J Ghimire, Jiaqiang Yan, David G Mandrus, Wang Yao, Fariba Hatami, Jelena Vučković, Arka Majumdar, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have emerged as new optoelectronic materials in the two dimensional (2D) limit, exhibiting rich spinvalley interplays, tunable excitonic effects, and strong light–matter interactions. An essential yet undeveloped ingredient for many photonic applications is the manipulation of its light emission. Here we demonstrate the control of excitonic light emission from monolayer tungsten diselenide (WSe2) in an integrated photonic structure, achieved by transferring one monolayer onto a photonic crystal (PhC) with a cavity. In addition to the observation of an effectively coupled cavity-mode emission, the suspension effects on PhC not only result in a greatly enhanced (∼ 60 times) photoluminescence but also strongly pattern the emission in the subwavelength spatial scale, contrasting on and off the holes. Such an effect leads to a significant diffraction grating effect …
URL Link: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2053-1583/1/1/011001/meta

Title: Single defect light-emitting diode in a van der waals heterostructure
Publication Date: 2016/5/26
Authors: Genevieve Clark, John R Schaibley, Jason Ross, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Joshua R Hendrickson, Shin Mou, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Single defects in monolayer WSe2 have been shown to be a new class of single photon emitters and have potential applications in quantum technologies. Whereas previous work relied on optical excitation of single defects in isolated WSe2 monolayers, in this work we demonstrate electrically driven single defect light emission by using both vertical and lateral van der Waals heterostructure devices. In both device geometries, we use few layer graphene as the source and drain and hexagonal boron nitride as the dielectric spacer layers for engineered tunneling contacts. In addition, the lateral devices utilize a split back gate design to realize an electrostatically defined p–i–n junction. At low current densities and low temperatures (∼5 K), we observe narrow spectral lines in the electroluminescence (EL) whose properties are consistent with optically excited defect bound excitons. We show that the emission originates …
URL Link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01580

Title: Photo-Nernst current in graphene
Publication Date: 2016/3
Authors: Helin Cao, Grant Aivazian, Zaiyao Fei, Jason Ross, David H Cobden, Xiaodong Xu

Title: Population Pulsation Resonances of Excitons in Monolayer MoSe 2 with Sub-1 μ eV Linewidths
Publication Date: 2015/4/1
Authors: John R Schaibley, Todd Karin, Hongyi Yu, Jason S Ross, Pasqual Rivera, Aaron M Jones, Marie E Scott, Jiaqiang Yan, DG Mandrus, Wang Yao, Kai-Mei Fu, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, a new class of atomically thin semiconductors, possess optically coupled 2D valley excitons. The nature of exciton relaxation in these systems is currently poorly understood. Here, we investigate exciton relaxation in monolayer using polarization-resolved coherent nonlinear optical spectroscopy with high spectral resolution. We report strikingly narrow population pulsation resonances with two different characteristic linewidths of 1 and at low temperature. These linewidths are more than 3 orders of magnitude narrower than the photoluminescence and absorption linewidth, and indicate that a component of the exciton relaxation dynamics occurs on time scales longer than 1 ns. The ultranarrow resonance () emerges with increasing excitation intensity, and implies the existence of a long-lived state whose lifetime exceeds 6 ns.
URL Link: https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.137402

Title: Electrical Tuning of Valley Magnetic Moment via Symmetry Control
Publication Date: 2012/8/30
Authors: Sanfeng Wu, Jason S Ross, Grant Aivazian, Aaron Jones, Zaiyao Fei, Gui-Bin Liu, Wenguang Zhu, Di Xiao, Wang Yao, David Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Crystal symmetry governs the nature of electronic Bloch states. For example, in the presence of time reversal symmetry, the orbital magnetic moment and Berry curvature of the Bloch states must vanish unless inversion symmetry is broken. In certain 2D electron systems such as bilayer graphene, the intrinsic inversion symmetry can be broken simply by applying a perpendicular electric field. In principle, this offers the remarkable possibility of switching on/off and continuously tuning the magnetic moment and Berry curvature near the Dirac valleys by reversible electrical control. Here we demonstrate this principle for the first time using bilayer MoS2, which has the same symmetry as bilayer graphene but has a bandgap in the visible that allows direct optical probing of these Berry-phase related properties. We show that the optical circular dichroism, which reflects the orbital magnetic moment in the valleys, can be continuously tuned from -15% to 15% as a function of gate voltage in bilayer MoS2 field-effect transistors. In contrast, the dichroism is gate-independent in monolayer MoS2, which is structurally non-centrosymmetric. Our work demonstrates the ability to continuously vary orbital magnetic moments between positive and negative values via symmetry control. This represents a new approach to manipulating Berry-phase effects for applications in quantum electronics associated with 2D electronic materials.
URL Link: https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.6069

Title: New Aspects of Photocurrent Generation at Graphene pn Junctions Revealed by Ultrafast Optical Measurements
Publication Date: 2011/8/16
Authors: Dong Sun, Grant Aivazian, Aaron M Jones, Wang Yao, David Cobden, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: The unusual electrical and optical properties of graphene make it a promising candidate for optoelectronic applications. An important, but as yet unexplored aspect is the role of photo-excited hot carriers in charge and energy transport at graphene interfaces. Here, we perform time-resolved (~250 fs) scanning photocurrent microscopy on a tunable graphene pn junction. The ultrafast pump-probe measurements yield a photocurrent response time of ~1.5 ps at room temperature increasing to ~4 ps at 20 K. Combined with the negligible dependence of photocurrent amplitude on environmental temperature this implies that hot carriers rather than phonons dominate energy transport at high frequencies. Gate-dependent pump-probe measurements demonstrate that both thermoelectric and built-in electric field effects contribute to the photocurrent excited by laser pulses. The relative weight of each contribution depends on the junction configuration. A single laser beam excitation also displays multiple polarity-reversals as a function of carrier density, a signature of impact ionization. Our results enhance the understanding of non-equilibrium electron dynamics, electron-electron interactions, and electron-phonon interactions in graphene. They also determine fundamental limits on ultrafast device operation speeds (~500 GHz) for potential graphene-based photon detection, sensing, and communication.
URL Link: https://arxiv.org/abs/1108.3360

Title: Interlayer Exciton Optoelectronics in a 2D Heterostructure pn Junction
Publication Date: 2017/3
Authors: Pasqual Rivera, Jason Ross, John Schaibley, Eric Lee-Wong, Hongyi Yu, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Jiaqiang Yan, David Mandrus, David Cobden, Wang Yao, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Semiconductor heterostructures are backbones for solid state based optoelectronic devices, which are now being engineered at the atomically thin limit using 2D semiconductors heterojunctions. In monolayer WSe 2-MoSe 2 heterobilayers, the type II band alignment causes the formation of interlayer excitons-with electron and hole confined to different layers-which have shown promising properties for novel excitonic devices. Here, we demonstrate interlayer exciton optoelectronics in an electrostatically defined pn junction, which uses tunneling contacts to preferentially inject electrons and holes directly into the n and p type monolayers of the heterobilayer. Wavelength dependent photocurrent measurements provide the first direct observation of resonant optical excitation of the interlayer exciton, which allows estimation of its oscillator strength compared to that of intralayer excitons. Furthermore, comparison of the …
URL Link: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017APS..MARH32004R/abstract

Title: Single Defect Light Emitting Diode in a van der Waals Heterostructure (Postprint)
Publication Date: 2016/5/23
Authors: Genevieve Clark, Jason Ross, Xiaodong Xu, Takashi Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Joshua R Hendrickson, Shin Mou, Wang Yao

Title: Single Quantum Emitters in Monolayer Tungsten Diselenide
Publication Date: 2016
Authors: Genevieve Clark, John Schaibley, Jason Ross, Yu-Ming He, Yu He, Wang Yao, Chaoyang Lu, Jianwei Pan, Xiaodong Xu
Abstract: Single quantum emitters are essential for developing photonic quantum technologies, providing single photon sources as well as stationary quantum bits. While they have been realized in a variety of solid state systems including single quantum dots and color centers in diamond, their three dimensional bulk matrix will be difficult to integrate with emerging nanoscale devices. We present single quantum emitters in a two-dimensional semiconductor, in the form of excitons localized to defects within atomically thin Tungsten Diselenide monolayers. These localized excitons show strong photoluminescence with 130 µeV emission lines from two non-degenerate, cross-polarized transitions. Second-order correlation measurements show strong photon anti-bunching, establishing that these localized excitons are single photon emitters. Magneto-optical measurements reveal an exciton g-factor of 8.7, significantly larger …
URL Link: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016APS..MARR17004C/abstract